Add new gall guide. (#1249)
urbit/urbit.org: content/docs/userspace/gall-guide/1-arvo.md

+++
title = "1. Arvo"
weight = 5
template = "doc.html"
+++

This document is a prologue to the Gall guide. If you've worked though [Hoon
School](/docs/hoon/hoon-school/intro) (or have otherwise learned the basics of

> hoon), you'll likely be familiar with generators, but not with all the other

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hoon), you'll likely be familiar with generators, but not with all the other
```

parts of the Arvo operating system or the way it fits together. We'll go over
the basic details here so you're better oriented to learn Gall agent
development. We'll not go into the internal workings of the kernel much, but
just what is necessary to understand it from the perspective of userspace.

## Arvo and its Vanes

[Arvo](/docs/arvo/overview) is the Urbit OS and kernel which is written in
[Hoon](/docs/glossary/hoon), compiled to [Nock](/docs/gossary/nock), and
executed by the runtime environment and virtual machine
[Vere](/docs/glossary/vere). Arvo has eight kernel modules called vanes:
[Ames](/docs/arvo/ames/ames), [Behn](/docs/arvo/behn/behn),
[Clay](/docs/arvo/clay/clay), [Dill](/docs/arvo/dill/dill),
[Eyre](/docs/arvo/eyre/eyre), [Gall](/docs/arvo/gall/gall),
[Iris](/docs/arvo/iris/iris), and [Jael](/docs/arvo/jael/jael).

Arvo itself has its own small codebase in `/sys/arvo.hoon` which primarily

> implements the transition function `(State, Event) -> (State, Effects)` for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
implements the [transition function](/docs/arvo/overview#operating-function) `(State, Event) -> (State, Effects)` for
```

its PKI data, etc. All the vanes and their states live in Arvo's state, so
Arvo's state ultimately contains the entire OS and its data.

Here's a brief summary of each of the vanes:

- **Ames**: This is both the name of Urbit's networking protocol, as well as the
  vane that handles communications over it. All inter-ship communications are
  done with Ames, but you'd not typically deal with it directly in a Gall agent
  because Gall itself handles it for you.
- **Behn**: A simple timer vane. Behn lets your Gall agent set timers which go off
  at the time specified and notify your agent.
- **Clay**: Filesystem vane. Clay is a revision-controlled, typed filesystem with a
  built-in build system. Your agent's source code lives in Clay. Your agent's
  source code and relevant files are automatically built and loaded upon
  installation, so your Gall agent itself would not need to interact with Clay
  unless you specifically wanted to read and write files.

- **Dill**: Terminal driver vane. You would not typically interact with Dill
  directly; printing messages to the terminal is usually done with hinting runes
  and functions rather than tasks to Dill, and CLI apps are mediated by a

>   sub-module of the Hood system agent called Drum. CLI apps will not be touched

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  sub-module of the `%hood` system agent called `%drum`. CLI apps will not be touched
```

  on in this guide, but there's a separate [CLI
  Apps](/docs/hoon/guides/cli-tutorial) guide which covers them if you're
  interested.
- **Eyre**: Webserver vane. App front-ends are served via Eyre. It's possible to
  handle HTTP requests directly in a Gall agent (see the [Eyre
  Guide](/docs/arvo/eyre/guide) for details), but usually you'd just serve a
  front-end [glob](/docs/userspace/dist/glob) via the `%docket` agent, so you'd
  not typically have your agent deal with Eyre directly.

- **Gall**: App management vane; this is where you agent lives.

- **Iris**: Web client vane. If you want your agent to query external web APIs and
  the like, it's done via Iris. Oftentimes web API interactions are

>   spun out into [Threads](/docs/userspace/threads/overview) to avoid

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  spun out into [threads](/docs/userspace/threads/overview) to avoid
```

some of these features in more detail later in the guide.

## Desk Anatomy

The fundamental unit in Clay is a desk. Desks are kind of like git repositories.
Urbit includes a few default desks: `%base`, `%garden`, `%landscape`, `%webterm`
and `%bitcoin`.

- `%base` - This desk contains the kernel as well as some core agents and utilities.
- `%garden` - This desk contains agents and utilities for managing apps, and the
  home screen that displays other app tiles.
- `%landscape` - This desk contains everything for the Groups app.
- `%webterm` - This desk is for the web dojo app.
- `%bitcoin` - This desk is for the bitcoin wallet app and bitcoin provider.

You'll typically also have a `%kids` desk, which is just a copy of `%base` from
upstream that sponsored ships (moons in the case of a planet, planets in the
case of a star) sync their `%base` desk from. Any third-party apps you've
installed will also have their own desks.

Each desk will typically have a few default directories. The directories are as
follows:

```
desk
├── app
├── gen
├── lib
├── mar
├── sur
├── sys  <- on %base desk only
├── ted
└── tests
```

- `app`: Gall agents.
- `gen`: Generators.

> - `lib`: Libraries - these would typically be imported with the `/+` Ford rune.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `lib`: Libraries - these are imported with the `/+` Ford rune.
```
as far as I'm aware, there is no other way to import a library.

- `mar`: `mark` files, which are filetype definitions.
- `sur`: Structures - these typically contain type definitions and structures,
  and would be imported with the `/-` Ford rune.
- `sys`: Kernel files and standard library. Only the `%base` desk has this
  directory, it's omitted entirely in all other desks.
- `ted`: Threads.
- `tests`: Unit tests, to be run by the `%test` thread. This is often omitted.

This directory hierarchy is not strictly enforced, but most tools expect things
to be in their right place. Any of these folders can be omitted if they'd
otherwise be empty.

As mentioned, the `%base` desk alone includes a `/sys` directory containing the
kernel and standard libraries. It looks like this:

```
sys
├── arvo.hoon
├── hoon.hoon
├── lull.hoon
├── vane
│   ├── ames.hoon
│   ├── behn.hoon
│   ├── clay.hoon
│   ├── dill.hoon
│   ├── eyre.hoon
│   ├── gall.hoon
│   ├── iris.hoon
│   └── jael.hoon
└── zuse.hoon
```

- `arvo.hoon`: Source code for Arvo itself.

> - `hoon.hoon`: Hoon standard library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `hoon.hoon`: Hoon standard library and compiler.
```

- `lull.hoon`: Mostly structures and type definitions for interacting with
  vanes.
- `vane`: This directory contains the source code for each of the vanes.
- `zuse.hoon`: This is an extra utility library. It mostly contains
  cryptographic functions and functions for dealing with web data like JSON.

In addition to the directories discussed, there's a handful of special files a
desk might contain. All of them live in the root of the desk, and all are
optional in the general case, except for `sys.kelvin`.

- `sys.kelvin`: Specifies the kernel version with which the desk is compatible.
  This is the only mandatory file in a desk.
- `desk.bill`: Specifies Gall agents to be auto-started upon desk installation.
- `desk.ship`: If the desk is being republished, the original publisher can be
  specified here.
- `desk.docket-0`: Configures the front-end, tile, and other metadata for desks
  which include a home screen app.

> Each desk must be self-contained; it must include all the `mark`s, libraries,

Reviewer: This information is largely duplicated in `/docs/arvo/reference/filesystem'. I think it is fine to duplicate reference information in tutorials, but we should also link to the reference somewhere in here. One line from the reference that I think would be great to include here is the remark that hoon.hoon is the subject of arvo.hoon, which is the subject of lull.hoon, which is the subject of zuse.hoon.

threads, etc, that it needs. The one exception is the kernel and standard
libraries from the `%base` desk. Agents, threads and generators in other desks
all have these libraries available to them in their subject.

## APIs

You should now have a general idea of the different parts of Arvo, but how does
a Gall agent interact with these things?

> There are two basic ways of interacting with other parts of the system: By

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two basic ways of interacting with other parts of the system: by
```

scrying them, and by passing them messages and receiving messages in response.

> There are also two basic things to interact with: Vanes, and other agents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are also two basic things to interact with: vanes, and other agents.
```

- Scries: The scry system allows you to access the state of other agents and
  vanes in a read-only fashion. Scries can be performed from any context with
  the dotket (`.^`) rune. Each vane has "scry endpoints" which define what you
  can read, and these are comprehensively documented in the Scry Reference of
  each vane's section of the [Arvo documentation](/docs/arvo/overview). Agents

>   can also define scry endpoints in the `+on-peek` arm of their agent core.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 define scry endpoints in the `+on-peek` arm of their agent core.
```
"can also" makes it sound like there might be another way.

>   Scries can only be done on the local ship, it is not yet possible to perform

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Scries can only be done on the local ship; it is not yet possible to perform
```

>   scries over the network. There is a separate [guide to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  scries over the network (but this functionality is planned for the future). There is a separate [guide to
```

  scries](/docs/arvo/concepts/scry) which you might like to read through for
  more details.
- Messages:
  - Vanes: Each vane has a number of `task`s it can be passed and `gift`s it can
    respond with in its respective section of `lull.hoon`. These might do all
    manner of things, depending on the vane. For example, Iris might fetch an
    external HTTP resource for you, Clay might read or build a specified file,

>     etc. The tasks and gifts of each vane are comprehensively documented in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    etc. The `task`s and `gift`s of each vane are comprehensively documented in the
```

    API Reference of each vane's section of the [Arvo
    documentation](/docs/arvo/overview).

>   - Agents: These can be `%poke`d with some data, and can also be `%watch`ed,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Agents: These can be `%poke`d with some data, which is a request to perform a single action. They can also be `%watch`ed,
```

    which means to subscribe for updates. We'll discuss these in detail later in
    the guide.

Here's a simplified diagram of the ways an agent can interact with other parts
of the system:

![api diagram](https://media.urbit.org/docs/userspace/gall-guide/api-diagram.svg)

Things like `on-poke` are arms of the agent core. Don't worry about their
meaning for now, we'll discuss them in detail later in the guide.

Inter-agent messaging can occur over the network, so you can interact with
agents on other ships as well as local ones. You can only talk to local vanes,
but some vanes like Clay are able to make requests to other ships on your

> behalf. Note this summary is simplified - vanes don't just talk in tasks and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
behalf. Note this summary is simplified - vanes don't just talk in `task`s and
```

> gifts in all cases. For example, requests from HTTP clients through Eyre (the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`gift`s in all cases. For example, requests from HTTP clients through Eyre (the
```

Each vane has its own state. Gall's state contains the agents it's managing,
Clay's state contains all the desks and their files, Jael's state contains all
its PKI data, etc. All the vanes and their states live in Arvo's state, so
Arvo's state ultimately contains the entire OS and its data.

Here's a brief summary of each of the vanes:

- **Ames**: This is both the name of Urbit's networking protocol, as well as the
  vane that handles communications over it. All inter-ship communications are
  done with Ames, but you'd not typically deal with it directly in a Gall agent
  because Gall itself handles it for you.
- **Behn**: A simple timer vane. Behn lets your Gall agent set timers which go off
  at the time specified and notify your agent.
- **Clay**: Filesystem vane. Clay is a revision-controlled, typed filesystem with a
  built-in build system. Your agent's source code lives in Clay. Your agent's
  source code and relevant files are automatically built and loaded upon
  installation, so your Gall agent itself would not need to interact with Clay
  unless you specifically wanted to read and write files.

- **Dill**: Terminal driver vane. You would not typically interact with Dill

>   directly; printing messages to the terminal is usually done with hinting runes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  directly; printing debug messages to the terminal is usually done with hinting runes
```

  and functions rather than tasks to Dill, and CLI apps are mediated by a
  sub-module of the `%hood` system agent called `%drum`. CLI apps will not be touched
  on in this guide, but there's a separate [CLI
  Apps](/docs/hoon/guides/cli-tutorial) guide which covers them if you're
  interested.
- **Eyre**: Webserver vane. App front-ends are served via Eyre. It's possible to
  handle HTTP requests directly in a Gall agent (see the [Eyre
  Guide](/docs/arvo/eyre/guide) for details), but usually you'd just serve a

>   front-end [glob](/docs/userspace/dist/glob) via the `%docket` agent, so you'd

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Eyre**: Webserver vane. App web front-ends are served via Eyre. It's possible to
  handle HTTP requests directly in a Gall agent (see the [Eyre
  Guide](/docs/arvo/eyre/guide) for details), but usually you'd just serve a
  front-end [glob](/docs/userspace/dist/glob) via the `%docket` agent, so you'd
```

Also very tempted to touch the "usually" there, but I'll restrain myself for now. (;

Gall agents live in "userspace" as opposed to "kernelspace". Kernelspace is Arvo
and its eight vanes. Userspace is primarily Gall agents, generators, threads,
front-ends, and all of their related files in Clay. The distinction looks
something like this:

[![kernelspace/userspace diagram](https://media.urbit.org/docs/userspace/gall-guide/kernelspace-userspace-diagram.svg)](https://media.urbit.org/docs/userspace/gall-guide/kernelspace-userspace-diagram.svg)

By and large, Gall _is_ the userspace vane - the majority of userspace is either
Gall agents, or things used by Gall agents. Apart from the agents themselves,
there's also:

- **Generators**: These are basically scripts. You'll likely already be familiar
  with these from Hoon School. Aside from learning exercises, their main use is
  to make interacting with Gall agents easier from the dojo. Rather than having
  to manually craft `%poke`s to agents, generators can take a simpler input,
  reformat it into what the agent actually expects, and poke the agent with it.
  When you do something like `:dojo|wipe` in the dojo, you're actually running
  the `/gen/dojo/wipe.hoon` generator and poking the `%dojo` agent with its
  output.

> - **Threads**: These are kind of like mini transient Gall agents, and are managed by

Reviewer 2: Not sure I like the comparison to gall agents here. May be better to just lead with something like "where generators are for strictly synchronous operations, threads make it easy to implement sequences of asynchronous operations".

  the `%spider` agent. They can be used as mere scripts like generators, but
  their main purpose is for performing complex IO. For example, suppose you need
  to query some external web API, then with the data in its response you make
  another API call, and then another, before finally having the data you need.
  If one of the API calls fails, your Gall agent is potentially left in a
  strange intermediary state. Instead, you can put all the IO logic in a
  separate thread which is completely atomic. That way the Gall agent only has
  to deal with the two conditions of success or failure. Writing threads are

>   covered in a [separate guide](/docs/userspace/threads/basics/fundamentals),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  to deal with the two conditions of success or failure. Writing threads is
  covered in a [separate guide](/docs/userspace/threads/basics/fundamentals),
```

  which you might like to work through after completing the Gall Guide.

- **Front-end**: Web UIs. It's possible for Gall agents to handle HTTP requests
  directly and dynamically produce responses, but it's more typical to have a
  separate [glob](/docs/userspace/dist/glob) of HTML, CSS, Javascript, images,

>   etc, which are served to the client like an ordinary web app. Such front-end

Reviewer 2: Suggestion, to make clear the contrast with the dynamic responses in-agent handling affords.

```suggestion
  directly and dynamically produce responses, but it's also possible to have a
  static [glob](/docs/userspace/dist/glob) of HTML, CSS, Javascript, images,
  etc, which are served to the client like an ordinary web app. Such front-end
```

## The Filesystem

On an ordinary OS, you have persistent disk storage and volatile memory. An
application is launched by reading an executable file on disk, loading it into
memory and running it. The application will maybe read some more files from
disk, deserialize them into data structures in memory, perform some computations
and manipulate the data, then serialize the new data and write it back to disk.
This process is necessary because persistent storage is too slow to operate on
directly and the fast memory is wiped when it loses power. The result is that
all non-emphemeral data is ultimately stored as files in the filesystem on disk.
Arvo on the other hand is completely different.

Arvo has no concept of volatile memory - its whole state is assumed to be
persistent. This means it's unnecessary for a Gall agent to write its data to
the filesystem or read it in from the filesystem - an agent can just modify its
state in situ and leave it there. The urbit runtime writes events to disk and
backs up Arvo's state on the host OS to ensure data integrity but Arvo itself
isn't concerned with such details.

> The result of this total persistence is that the filesystem—Clay—does not have

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The result of this total persistence is that the filesystem — Clay — does not have
```

the same fundamental role as on an ordinary OS. In Arvo, very little of its data
is actually stored in Clay. The vast majority is just in the state of Gall
agents and vanes. For example, none of the chat messages, notebooks, etc, in the
Groups app exist in Clay - they're all in the state of the `%graph-store` agent.
For the most part, Clay just stores source code.

Clay has a few unique features - it's a typed filesystem, with all file types
defined in `mark` files. It's revision controlled, in a similar way to git. It
also has a built-in build system (formerly a separate vane called Ford, but was
merged with Clay in 2020 to make atomicity of upgrades easier). We'll look at
some of these features in more detail later in the guide.

## Desk Anatomy

The fundamental unit in Clay is a desk. Desks are kind of like git repositories.

> Urbit includes a few default desks: `%base`, `%garden`, `%landscape`, `%webterm`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, new urbits come with the following desks included: `%base`, `%garden`, `%landscape`, `%webterm`
```

and `%bitcoin`.

- `%base` - This desk contains the kernel as well as some core agents and utilities.
- `%garden` - This desk contains agents and utilities for managing apps, and the
  home screen that displays other app tiles.
- `%landscape` - This desk contains everything for the Groups app.
- `%webterm` - This desk is for the web dojo app.
- `%bitcoin` - This desk is for the bitcoin wallet app and bitcoin provider.

You'll typically also have a `%kids` desk, which is just a copy of `%base` from
upstream that sponsored ships (moons in the case of a planet, planets in the
case of a star) sync their `%base` desk from. Any third-party apps you've
installed will also have their own desks.

Each desk will typically have a few default directories. The directories are as

> follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Desks are typically assumed to store their files according to the following directory structure:
```

Not really defaults, more like conventions that are baked into the system.

```
desk
├── app
├── gen
├── lib
├── mar
├── sur

> ├── sys  <- on %base desk only

Reviewer 2: Consider removing the qualification here, since it's already described below.

```suggestion
├── sys
```

├── ted
└── tests
```

- `app`: Gall agents.
- `gen`: Generators.
- `lib`: Libraries - these are imported with the `/+` Ford rune.
- `mar`: `mark` files, which are filetype definitions.
- `sur`: Structures - these typically contain type definitions and structures,
  and would be imported with the `/-` Ford rune.
- `sys`: Kernel files and standard library. Only the `%base` desk has this
  directory, it's omitted entirely in all other desks.
- `ted`: Threads.

> - `tests`: Unit tests, to be run by the `%test` thread. This is often omitted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `tests`: Unit tests, to be run by the `%test` thread. This is often omitted in distributed desks.
```

Just clarifying this to be less "tests are often omitted" and more "tests are often not shipped alongside the production version of software".

This directory hierarchy is not strictly enforced, but most tools expect things
to be in their right place. Any of these folders can be omitted if they'd

> otherwise be empty.

Reviewer 2: fyi, technically, clay has no concept of folders, just paths mapping to files. So `/ted` only exists in the sense that `/ted/a` exists and happens to start with `/ted`, and so "all files under `/ted`" becomes a meaningful query.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps you could consider accounting for this in the file listings you make here, ie:

```
/sys
/sys/arvo.hoon
/sys/vane/ames.hoon
/sys/vane/behn.hoon
```

etc. Though, if we're going that far, we should also stop pretending the `.` isn't just a `/` in clay. (^:

In any case, not sure if the legibility cost is worth the clay understanding gains this would get you. So, just a suggestion, take it or leave it.

kernel and standard libraries. It looks like this:

```
sys
├── arvo.hoon
├── hoon.hoon
├── lull.hoon
├── vane
│   ├── ames.hoon
│   ├── behn.hoon
│   ├── clay.hoon
│   ├── dill.hoon
│   ├── eyre.hoon
│   ├── gall.hoon
│   ├── iris.hoon
│   └── jael.hoon
└── zuse.hoon
```

- `arvo.hoon`: Source code for Arvo itself.
- `hoon.hoon`: Hoon standard library and compiler.
- `lull.hoon`: Mostly structures and type definitions for interacting with
  vanes.
- `vane`: This directory contains the source code for each of the vanes.
- `zuse.hoon`: This is an extra utility library. It mostly contains
  cryptographic functions and functions for dealing with web data like JSON.

The chain of dependency for the core kernel files is `hoon.hoon` -> `arvo.hoon`
-> `lull.hoon` -> `zuse.hoon`. For more information, see the [Filesystem
Hierarchy](/docs/arvo/reference/filesystem) documentation.

In addition to the directories discussed, there's a handful of special files a
desk might contain. All of them live in the root of the desk, and all are
optional in the general case, except for `sys.kelvin`.

- `sys.kelvin`: Specifies the kernel version with which the desk is compatible.

>   This is the only mandatory file in a desk.

Reviewer 2: Except that you need the `/mar/kelvin.hoon` to be able to include that file, and the `/mar/hoon.hoon` to include _that_ one, and then again for the `%noun` mark. There's an argument to be made those should all just be hardcoded into clay, but right now the minimal desk is a little less trivial. See also urbit/urbit#5360.

- `desk.bill`: Specifies Gall agents to be auto-started upon desk installation.
- `desk.ship`: If the desk is being republished, the original publisher can be
  specified here.
- `desk.docket-0`: Configures the front-end, tile, and other metadata for desks
  which include a home screen app.

Each desk must be self-contained; it must include all the `mark`s, libraries,
threads, etc, that it needs. The one exception is the kernel and standard
libraries from the `%base` desk. Agents, threads and generators in other desks
all have these libraries available to them in their subject.

## APIs

You should now have a general idea of the different parts of Arvo, but how does
a Gall agent interact with these things?

There are two basic ways of interacting with other parts of the system: by

> scrying them, and by passing them messages and receiving messages in response.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
scrying into them, and by passing them messages and receiving messages in response.
```

  define scry endpoints in the `+on-peek` arm of their agent core.
  Scries can only be done on the local ship; it is not yet possible to perform
  scries over the network (but this functionality is planned for the future). There is a separate [guide to
  scries](/docs/arvo/concepts/scry) which you might like to read through for
  more details.
- Messages:
  - Vanes: Each vane has a number of `task`s it can be passed and `gift`s it can
    respond with in its respective section of `lull.hoon`. These might do all
    manner of things, depending on the vane. For example, Iris might fetch an
    external HTTP resource for you, Clay might read or build a specified file,
    etc. The `task`s and `gift`s of each vane are comprehensively documented in the
    API Reference of each vane's section of the [Arvo
    documentation](/docs/arvo/overview).
  - Agents: These can be `%poke`d with some data, which is a request to perform a single action. They can also be `%watch`ed,
    which means to subscribe for updates. We'll discuss these in detail later in
    the guide.

Here's a simplified diagram of the ways an agent can interact with other parts
of the system:

> ![api diagram](https://media.urbit.org/docs/userspace/gall-guide/api-diagram.svg)

Reviewer 2: Since this intends to highlight interaction _from_ your agent _to_ other apps, maybe this should not include the `+on-poke` for your agent, and not include the `+on-agent` for other agents, because these aren't necessarily part of the "my agent interacts with some other agent" loop.

iow, only show request handling on the places we send requests to, and only show response handling on our side.
